For what service is the Dobrowolsri three wir 
dynamo adapted? 


Dynamo and Motor Experiments — 303 





CHAPTER 16 





Experiments Illustrating 
Dynamo and Motor Principles 


In this chapter a number of simple experiments are shown 
vhich will be very helpful to the student in showing in a 


E. KNOTT APPRS-V= 


in 
yo 
: : u iS 
Hue ; I: : 
NG, L 


tS 
. SV SSSES 





3. 448.—Gilley Gramme machine. Designed to show the lines of force in a working model 
»f the dynamo and motor with the armature in position and in actual operation. Both the 
jeld and armature are designed and made in flat form, so that the upper surfaces of both 
ire level, permitting the paper or glass upon which the lines of force by the filings method 
ire to be mapped, to take a smooth, horizontal position. The lines of force are thus per- 


nitted to arrange themselves under no other influence than that of the magnetic force exist- 
ng in the armature and field. 


nple way “how it works.” The two elementary machines 
ed in making the experiments are: 


1. Gilley Gramme machine; 
2. Miller-Cowen Dynamo. 


NNN 





304 Dynamo and Motor Experiments 





The Gilley-Gramme machine is a modification of a type of machin 
now generally used for large units for power and lighting stations, so worke 
out that the lines of force may easily be plotted by the compass and filing 
methods. 


The Miller-Cowen attachment is an outgrowth of the Gilley Gramm 
machine and was built meeting the requirements of Professors Miller anc 
Cowen of Boston schools. Their purpose was to design a machine o 


s Cs ve ig 
. \ 4 -— 


— 7 ‘ x \ 
—t | x . Y \ \N — 
—t IN 4 MM 2 
7 ke } A -: AM \\ 7 
ae N = NYAS 
Ae EEE dN IN 
SAS \\\ ‘ \ BS ; 
ae \\\ YY \ No 
—-s ey ' \ & 2. INNO 
SA ZEA WO . @: / 
NM ZO Ay, . pes? 
ALE \\ a Mp Ny i} 
rm tf \ WS Wy Y) - 
BY, y Nn @O® } 
SU KW ES 
yy A . 
LY) \ — re 
2 Y \\ 
tf, My We . SS r . 
x Wy 
YAH hh \ 
Ml / Tif HT \\ » 
PPE AD \ 
What 
] 


‘aisle 


i} 


pas Se ee ES Sas 
LIE I ———— 
iy 
SSoSTon — || MASS. — 





Fias. 449 to 451.—Gilley Gramme machine disassembled showing the three basic parts of the 
apparatus: 1, armature with the commutator; 2, the field magnet with base; 3, the brust 
holder. The instrument is readily dissected, as the illustrations show. Each part can be 
studied separately, as will be noted. The four part armature has four segment commutator 
The connections of the coils to the commutator segments, being on the under side of the 
armature, are not shown in the illustration. The field coil is easily removed from its basse 
so designed that 6 in. permanent magnets can be substituted for the field coil, thus teaching 
the fundamental principle of the magneto. 


large open construction, using the same field magnets as are used in the 
G lley Gramme machine, and by eliminating the feature of plotting the 
lines of force by the iron filings method they were enabled to design a ma. 
chine which could be used in lecture table demonstration and used tc 


Dynamo and Motor Experiments 305 





develop all of the fundamental principles of both direct and alternating 
current machines. 


Directions for Experiments with Gilley Gramme Ma- 
ine.—Ihe following experiments are fundamental. | 
1ey are the experiments usually selected for secondary 
1001 work. Many modifications and additions to this 
t will suggest themselves to the teacher. 


a!" 


ssit° 
grist 


Preis | 


set 





ih sotee 


452.—DMiller-Cowen machine for study of both d.c. and a.c._ In order to enakle the student 
see clearly the working of the essential parts of the instrument, the split commutator for 
e direct current and the collecting rings for the alternating current are greatly enlarged 
id separated from the armature winding. In order to make clear the effect of the iron core 
the moving armature, the instrument is designed so that the iron core, which for the sake 
efficiency is laminated, is made easily removable, so that the instrument may be used 
cher with or without the core. The field magnet may be easily removed and small per- 
anent magnets clamped under the same screws. The Miller-Cowen machine serves to 
‘:monstrate; 1, use of commutator; 2, effect of speed of rotation; 3, separately and self 
cited alternators; 4, series, shunt and compound dynamos. The galvanometer used should 
t be of high sensibility. Any milli-ampere meter in good working order may be used to 
vantage. 





306 Dynamo and Motor Experiments 


The experiments here described have been compiled by 
teacher of long experience in one of the larger Middle We 
High Schools, the selection and sequence of the work bet 
such as he has found most helpful to his students in developi 
a clear understanding of the principle and operation of tl] 
dynamo and motor. 


Exercise 1. Nature of the Field Magnet. 


Part 1.—Remove the electromagnet (usually called the field magn 
from the machine and lay it on a page of a note book (fig. 454). Mark 
outline on the paper. Connect wires from the poles of a battery to t 
binding posts and indicate on the paper the direction of the current 






=n 


Fias. 453 to 455.—Exercise 1. Gilley Gramme machine with field magnet removed tllust7 
ing the nature of the field magnet. 


the wires by arrows, remembering that the current is assumed to cor 
from the copper or carbon pole of the battery. Show by an arrow t 
direction of the current on the top side of the coil. From the direct 
of the current in the coil determine the North and South poles of the me 
net, using Ampere’s rule for the purpose. Mark large letters N and 
on these poles in the diagram. 


Now place a small compass between the poles and trace several lines 
force in the following way: Place the compass near to one pole piece, a 
directly under the compass mark the direction in which its North e 
points. Move the compass ahead in that direction. Mark the directi 
in which it now points, and so on until the line is traced. Several lir 
traced in this way, each starting from a different point on the pole piet 
will show the distribution of lines ir. the circular space between the pol 


Dynamo and Motor Experiments 307 


To get an idea of the strength of this field, which has just been mapped, 
notice how fast the compass needle vibrates after being tipped or jarred 
when it is between the pole pieces. The stronger the field, the more rap- 
idly the needle vibrates. The field strength is proportional to the square 
of the number of vibrations per minute. 


Part 2.—With the compass still remaining between the poles disconnect. 
the wires from the electromagnet. Notice how fast the compass needle 
vibrates, and from this compare the strength of the magnetic field when 
current is and is not flowing through the coil. Notice whether the needle 
indicates that the iron has retained any of its magnetism. The small 
amount of magnetism which remains in iron after the current stops flowing 
is called “‘residual magnetism.”’ 


Part 3.—Again connect the electromagnet with the cell, but this time 


Ay 





GS. 456 and 457.—Exercise 2. Gilley Gramme machine as connected to illustrate the effect of 
tron ring of armature. 


with the current in the coil reversed. ‘With the aid of the compass needle, 
notice what change has been made in the lines of force. 


Part 4.—Plot the lines of force by the iron filings method as follows: 
Having the coil connected with the battery, lay a sheet of note book paper 
over the pole pieces and sprinkle iron filings until, with gentle tapping, 
the lines are distinctly formed. Draw a diagram showing the pole pieces 
and these iron filing lines. 


Exercise 2. Effect of Iron Ring of Armature. 


Part 1.—Place the armature between the pole pieces of the field magnet 
as shown in fig. 457. Send current from a cell through the field magnet 
coil and with the compass needle find what alteration in the lines of force 
of the field magnet has been made by the presence of the iron ring of the 
armature. 


308 Dynamo and Motor Experiments 


Part 2.—Plot the lines of force under these new conditions by the 1 
filings method and make a diagram of field magnet, iron ring and line 
force as shown by the filings. The presence of this iron ring between 
pole pieces has changed the shape of the lines of force. Notice : 
whether the presence of the iron has increased or decreased the stren 
of the magnetic field between the pole pieces. (Compare this diag 
with the diagram in Part 4 of Exercise 1.) 
